we all know there's more water on Earth
than lat
just in case you've died the seas cover
71% or 362 million square kilometers of
the Earth's surface and we all know
there are five oceans and just in case
you don't there's the Pacific that's the
big one
the Indian the Atlantic the southern and
the Arctic Ocean it's the cold one
now within all that water around 321
million 3271 cubic miles there exists a
plethora of creatures but one that can
barely be seen by the naked eye is
arguably the most important of all
pointer
there are three main groups of these
organisms there's bacteria plankton made
up of bacteria and archaea that's
single-celled microorganisms
there's phytoplankton which is
plant-based and finally zooplankton
which are predominantly tiny living
animals they can be as small as nought
point two micrometers and micrometer
being a thousandth of a millimetre
that's smaller than the diameter of a
human hair
now while plankton may appear to be
aimless drifters directionless in their
movements in life they play a key role
and perhaps the most vital organism on
earth you see each and every plankton
ought to be more precise planning to
perform a unique job and if they were to
suddenly disappear quite frankly the
ocean the earth and us would be stuffed
without them the whole marine ecosystem
would soon collapse with no
phytoplankton to clear up the waste the
zooplankton have nothing to eat and with
no plankton what are the small predators
going to eat oceanic megafauna like
dolphins whales and sharks with nothing
to eat would soon perish now plankton
also account for around 20% of all
photosynthesis on earth and around 95%
of the recycling of organic matter in
the ocean yep without plankton the
oceans would be a barren wasteland of
watery nothingness but it doesn't stop
in the water with the foundation of the
food chain gone seabirds with nothing to
eat would soon fall from the sky seals
dead through hunger polar bears yep
they're goners - and this is where a
world without plankton would start to
affect us with around 70% of the human
population living within sixty
kilometers of the coastline
and depending on around 80 million tons
of fish per year
no plankton means no fish no local trade
and economic collapse no fish with your
chips and ultimately millions at the
hungry people
fancy popping out to do the weekly shop
in your car no you see dead and decaying
plankton and their fecal pellets drift
down to the ocean floor and take with
them the carbon they contained over
millions of years this matter creates
the world's oil and gas reserves so no
plankton no fuel so your car won't work
factories would fall silent homes would
be powerless and cities would cease to
function it's not just fuel that would
be lost
plankton use the Earth's solar energy to
convert co2 and nutrients into
carbohydrates
and the vital molecules we all need to
survive take a deep breath nope really
take one yep 50% of the oxygen that just
went into your lungs was produced by
plankton so if you think it's just
marine creatures that would be affected
if these guys go think again the absence
of these tiny organisms would be a
global catastrophe which most of us
wouldn't survive plankton are our
planet's unsung heroes and they if you
ask me are a pretty good reason to look
after our oceans and if you want to see
spongebob and Sheldon taking over BBC
earth then click here and do you
remember to subscribe to earth unplugged
see you next time